README.md, before:

# nanoGPT DAG Experiment

This repository extends [nanoGPT](https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT) with a differentiable
DAG module for lightweight numeric reasoning. The DAG controller attends over
previous nodes and chooses simple operations such as addition and subtraction
(see `dag_model.py`). The `DAGGPT` model runs the transformer while preserving a
copy of the input embeddings. A separate DAG stream operates on this copy and
its final node is decoded back to a numeric token.
The module implements basic ops (`add`, `multiply`, `subtract`, `divide`, `identity`) and learns to compose them via attention.
The experiment evaluates whether this reasoning layer improves performance on small arithmetic problems.

## Architecture

The figure below illustrates how the differentiable DAG layer plugs into the regular GPT pipeline. The DAG now starts
from numeric values for **all** tokens. Numeric tokens are decoded from their binary tag while non-numeric tokens first
pass through an attention block that predicts a float value which is then rounded. These values seed the DAG, which
operates independently from the transformer. At the final step a gate mixes the transformer state with the DAG output.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Input Tokens] --> B[BinaryAwareEmbedding]
    B --> C[Add Position Embeddings]
    C --> D[Transformer Blocks]
    D --> E[LayerNorm]
    B --> F{Numeric?}
    F -->|yes| G[Binary bits to float]
    F -->|no| H[Token Attention]
    H --> I[Project to float & round]
    G --> J[Initial DAG Nodes]
    I --> J
    J --> K[Differentiable DAG]
    E --> L[Gate]
    K --> L
    L --> M[LM Head]
```

The model processes tokens normally through the transformer to produce logits. In parallel, the DAG builds a numeric reasoning path from the raw token embeddings. A gating layer at the end chooses between the transformer state and the DAG output before decoding the final token.

## Installation

```bash
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
```

## Training

Run a toy training job on CPU using the default configuration:

```bash
python train.py config/train_default.py --dag_depth=4
```

Any option in `TrainConfig` can be overridden on the command line, e.g.
`--max_iters=100` or `--batch_size=4`.

## Testing

```bash
pytest
```

The tests cover the tokenizer, DAG logic and the training script.

After running inference you can decode the DAG prediction to a float using
``DAGGPT.predict_number`` together with ``NumericTokenizer``.

## Benchmark

```bash
python bench.py
```

This benchmarks a minimal model forward and backward pass.

## RunPod

Set up a virtual environment and install the RunPod SDK:

```bash
python3 -m venv env
source env/bin/activate
python -m pip install runpod
```

Check the installed version:

```bash
pip show runpod
python3 -c "import runpod; print(runpod.__version__)"
```

Configure your API key in code:

```python
import runpod
import os

runpod.api_key = os.getenv("RUNPOD_API_KEY")
```

Launch training in the cloud:

```bash
python runpod_service.py train config/train_default.py --gpu "NVIDIA A100 40GB PCIe"
```

Or run inference using an existing endpoint:

```bash
python runpod_service.py infer "a math question" --endpoint ENDPOINT_ID
```

### Troubleshooting tips

* **502 errors** – ensure your pod has a GPU attached and inspect its logs for errors.
* **Storage full** – check disk usage with `df -h` and remove large files or mount a network volume.
* **Leaked API keys** – disable or revoke the compromised key from the console.

Commit message:

Add post-DAG transformer block

README.md, after:

# nanoGPT DAG Experiment

This repository extends [nanoGPT](https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT) with a differentiable
DAG module for lightweight numeric reasoning. The DAG controller attends over
previous nodes and chooses simple operations such as addition and subtraction
(see `dag_model.py`). The `DAGGPT` model runs the transformer while preserving a
copy of the input embeddings. A separate DAG stream operates on this copy and
its final node is decoded back to a numeric token.
The module implements basic ops (`add`, `multiply`, `subtract`, `divide`, `identity`) and learns to compose them via attention.
The experiment evaluates whether this reasoning layer improves performance on small arithmetic problems.

## Architecture

The figure below illustrates how the differentiable DAG layer plugs into the regular GPT pipeline. The model processes
tokens normally through the transformer and then snaps each token to a numeric value predicted from the final hidden
states. These numeric values seed a differentiable DAG that performs lightweight arithmetic. The DAG output is passed
through a small transformer block to return it to the semantic space before a gating layer mixes this result with the
transformer state prior to decoding the final token.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Input Tokens] --> B[Embedding]
    B --> C[Add Position Embeddings]
    C --> D[Transformer Blocks]
    D --> E[LayerNorm]
    E --> F[Snap Block]
    F --> G[Token Attention]
    G --> H[Project to float & round]
    H --> I[Initial DAG Nodes]
    I --> J[Differentiable DAG]
    J --> K[Post-DAG Block]
    E --> L[Gate]
    K --> L
    L --> M[LM Head]
```

The model processes tokens normally through the transformer to produce logits. In parallel, the DAG builds a numeric reasoning path from the raw token embeddings. Its final node is run through a transformer block to convert back to the semantic space. A gating layer then chooses between the transformer state and this transformed DAG output before decoding the final token.

## Installation

```bash
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
```

## Training

Run a toy training job on CPU using the default configuration:

```bash
python train.py config/train_default.py --dag_depth=4
```

Any option in `TrainConfig` can be overridden on the command line, e.g.
`--max_iters=100` or `--batch_size=4`.

## Testing

```bash
pytest
```

The tests cover the DAG logic and the training script.

## Benchmark

```bash
python bench.py
```

This benchmarks a minimal model forward and backward pass.

## RunPod

Set up a virtual environment and install the RunPod SDK:

```bash
python3 -m venv env
source env/bin/activate
python -m pip install runpod
```

Check the installed version:

```bash
pip show runpod
python3 -c "import runpod; print(runpod.__version__)"
```

Configure your API key in code:

```python
import runpod
import os

runpod.api_key = os.getenv("RUNPOD_API_KEY")
```

Launch training in the cloud:

```bash
python runpod_service.py train config/train_default.py --gpu "NVIDIA A100 40GB PCIe"
```

Or run inference using an existing endpoint:

```bash
python runpod_service.py infer "a math question" --endpoint ENDPOINT_ID
```

### Troubleshooting tips

* **502 errors** – ensure your pod has a GPU attached and inspect its logs for errors.
* **Storage full** – check disk usage with `df -h` and remove large files or mount a network volume.
* **Leaked API keys** – disable or revoke the compromised key from the console.
